{{underconstruction}}
A '''typeset''' is a set of datatypes.

For example, when you define a function, you specify the datatypes of arguments in this way:

<pre>
f: func [arg1 [integer! number!] arg2 [string! url!]] ...
</pre>

What follows each arg word is a set of accepted datatypes.

Rebol 3.0 adds a new datatype called a typeset! A typeset is
simply a compact, high-performance method of storing the datatype sets
as a new kind of datatype. Typesets are important because the
interpreter uses them to quickly validate function arguments.

The typeset! datatype knows how to convert a block of datatype names
such as [integer! decimal! money!] into an internal representation
(similar to the bitset datatype). It can also convert the internal
format back to a block for output or changes.

The addition of typesets eliminates the need for the special Rebol
pseudo-datatypes like series! and number!. These are now
implemented as typesets, but you can use them the same way as before.
They can be used in function argument specifications:

<pre>
f: func [arg1 [number!] arg2 [series!]] ...
</pre>

and also for datatype tests:

<pre>
if series? value [....]
</pre>

Note, however, this difference. In Rebol 2.*:

<pre>
type? series!
datatype!
</pre>

in Rebol 3.0 becomes:

<pre>
type? series!
typeset!
</pre>

For advanced users, Rebol 3.0 will provide a way to create and manage
your own custom typesets.

<pre>
tmp-type: make typeset! [time! money! percent!]

f: func [arg1 [tmp-type]] [...]
</pre>